IN PROGRESS

I've been thinking a bit recently about different models of musical leadership, and how those different approaches are analogous to some of the ways we lead and contribute in other ways- both generally, and also in the specific realm of "The Movement" of Sacred Music.

While I'm sure there are others, the three modes of musical leadership I am most familiar with (in the context of leading an ensemble in the making of music) are:
1. Conductor-centered leadership.
2. Ensemble-centered leadership.
3. Soloist-centered leadership.

Each of these approaches is appropriate in different contexts, with different groups or types of ensembles, when performing different styles of music. The temperament and talents of the people and involved (and the people attempting to do the "leading") also determine which style of leadership is the most effective.

In this, the first of a three-part series, I would like to look at Conductor-centered leadership, and how each of us can exercise this particular style of leadership in the promotion of the cause of Sacred Music.

Conductor-centered leadership

This is (probably) the style of leadership we are all most familiar with, so much so that it might be the only one of the three which specifically strikes us as "leadership." This is the model of the conductor or music director who stands at the head of the choir or orchestra and leads a performance.

I'm not much of a conductor- but I think I do alright. To the extent that the success of my choir is attributable to my musical leadership, I think it is chiefly in two things that I do:
1. Have a "vision" for what the music should sound like.
2. Do the best I can to communicate that vision to the choir.

Of course there something of a third skill- making the choir willing and able to carry out the vision that has been communicated to them. But it's hard to separate that much from point 2, I think.

At any rate: I was pondering this recently, thinking about what, besides these two things, I could do to be a better director. I was thinking- I'm approaching this too simply that those two things are all I do. Surely, a better conductor does more.

But the more I think about it- the more I think I'm wrong on that point, that these two things- having a vision and being able to communicate it- are probably the crux of the whole thing.

Becoming a better conductor, then, doesn't involve doing something radically different than those two things. It involves having a more and more profound vision and having better and better ways to communicate that vision.

We can develop a better musical vision by experiencing more (and better) musical performances, studying theory and structure, spending more time in preparation, and so forth. We can develop a better way to communicate that vision by spending time talking with other musicians, studying conducting technique, learning about psychology and educational theory, and so forth. Of course, lots of non-musical experience contributes as well- philosophy, art, culture, a well-developed spiritual life, a sense of language, a sense of humor- these things (what one might call "being well rounded") contribute both to having a clear and worthwhile vision and being able to communicate it.

I was thinking about this when it struck me that these are the same two skills needed for leading the Sacred Music movement (and, you know- any other movement as well).

And by "leading" I do not at all mean leadership in any institutional or hierarchical sense. I do not mean formal leadership, or the kind that might be exercised by a music director, a parish priest, or a bishop (although, all these "formal leaders" can, and should, exercise the kind of leadership I am speaking of). I do not mean "telling people what to do."

Many of us have a vision for Sacred Music in the world. For some of us, it is vague and unspecific - "more people should sing better music more often in more places." For others of us, it is exacting, even demanding - "all Roman Rite Masses should sing the full Gregorian Propers from the Graduale, in Latin (according to the latest interpretations of the oldest manuscript sources)." Among the many of us involved in one way or another in this crazy and wonderful endeavor is quite a bit of disagreement what the vision, or the ideal, should be- or even if there should be one single vision or ideal. 

And that's okay, because even within the range of opinions and preferences and ideals and whatevers that are held by this crazy and wonderful group of people involved in this crazy and wonderful endeavor, there is a vast amount of improvement over what has been in the world before, and there is an underlying current of truth, beauty, and devotion that underlies all these views.

What we need, then, is not so much the technical knowledge needed to convince each other that our particular approach to things is more right than somebody else's slightly different approach. What we need, it seems to me, is more people sharing the vision.

We effect that change in the world- each of us individually- the same way that we shape a piece of music with a choir- by first having a vision ourselves, and then doing the best we can to communicate with others.

To become more effective in this role, we need to become better visionaries. This is where studying the documents, the history, and the tradition comes into play. I am of the opinion that official documents are much more useful for providing us with a clear vision than they are for communicating (winning arguments).
